The Passionate Morris.

London, Imprinted by Richard Jones. 1593.

To the Gentlewomen and others of England.
ONce more (most beautiful damsels) I am bold to presume of your wonted favor,
thereby being lead to a performance of a vowed duty, where a kind zeal
binds to offer the acceptance of a serviceable good will, there a careful
feate that forewarneth to incur the hazard of offense, makes the heart to
stagger between hope and despair: hoping through the kindenes of your gentle
dispositions, to obtain a defense against injurious cauillers, and fearing by
an ouer-bolde presumption, to offer offense to the affable sweetenes of your
sovereign courtesy. But seeing my desire to be possessed of the better
cordial, makes me hart-strong to suppe of that potion which is likest to
lengthen my welfare, the same being an assured confidence of your continual
carefulnes, in shrowding with your affection the slender substance of my
humorous Morris.

It is not long since for Tel-troths Newyeeres-gift, I presented unto your
liking Robin good fellow his news, with his inuectiue against Loves most
injurious enemy Jealousy: which though it was a token to gratify the day, yet
if with indifferent judgment the matter therein contained be considered of, I
doubt not, though it was a New-yeeres day toy, it may prove a many years help
to hinder that hagges enterprises. The work took his title according to the
time of his creation but shall Robins prescriptions be followed; the patients
malady shall continually find it a gift to signify the good beginning and
prosperous proceeding of many new years unto them. But now to send Tell-troth
packing, Honesty has thrust himself into your service, who though at the
first sight he may seem a crabbed companion, yet let me beseech you to stay
your censure til you have thoroughly tried what is in him, and if then he shows
not himself a diligent pleaser of your immortal virtues, memorize in the
Cronicles of Disdain the same of that runnagate simplicity, and let me for
his fault be banished from your good thoughts to everlasting ignominy.

I was rather desirous to travel altogether invisible, then to have had a title
which might give light to the understanding of me your unworthy professed
Author; but since the higher powers deny me that privilege, I am content to
subject my self to the opinions of courteous dispositions: beseeching you to
bear with my vain, for that the vanity of this age regardes no other, nor
would any be content to hear of faults, unless they be told them in
meriment. I protest there is nothing scandalous therein, nor which is meant to
offer injury to any, only my purpose is, that if you should know any like unto
any of those in disposition, that either you forewarne them those monstrous
injurious vices, or account of them as pestilent foolish wretches. To shun
tediousnes, I commit m^ intention to your mystical consideration, my work to
your courteous protection, my self to your favorable opinions, and your
sacred selves to the heavens tuition.

Yours in service and affection most loyal A.

THE PASSOINATE Morris.
IN the month of March, a time as fit for wooing as May is pleasant to sport
in, Honesty traveling as his custom is, to search such corners as good
fellowship h^unteth, it was my hap, coming into Hogsden, to light upon a
house, wherein were met such a troop of lovers, as had not the hall been
wondrous big, a multitude should have been forced to stand without doors. Yet
though the room was so spacious, as an army might have lodged therein without
pesterment, notwithstanding it was so well filled at this instant, as all the
place Honesty could get amongst them, was to sit on the rafters on the top of
the house, which fitted best my humor, that desires rather to see then to be
seen. There seated in my Majesty (as ready to hear news, as the pick thank
is forward to tell news) I might easily perceive my lovers mated, as if they
meant to make March birds, every man having his sweet heart, and every couple
their corner. There were of all sorts, and in many manners sorted, some
batchelers sewed to widows, others to maids, widdowers likewise wooed some
maids, and othersome widows, there was age and youth coupled together,
equality of years courting each other, and diversity of dispositions, arguing
to make a sympathy.

Amongst them, I lent my ears first to a couple that had chosen forth the most
secret corner in the house, which were not worst fitted for years; for it was
a youth of three and twenty, that had matched himself with a maid of
eighteen: he holding her upon his knee, with his right hand clasping hers,
and his left about her middle, made many proffers to win her favor, and
breathed many sighs to show his love, he vowed constancy with protestations,
and confirmed with oaths the pleadge of his loyalty; he showed her how long he
had loved her before he durst tell her of his affection, how many iournies he
had made with loss of labor, and how many complaints to the God of Love not
finding any remedy. He made her privy to the many hours he had at sundry
times spent in watching to have a sight of her, showing unto her how joyful he
were, had he, perchance, but seen any creature belonging to her fathers house,
yea were it but the little dog that turned the spit. Many times (quoth he) have
I looked up to the window, imagining I have seen thy picture engraven in the
glass, when with long gasing to view the true portrature thereof, I have at
last recalled my self, by letting my soul see how mine eyes were deceived, in
expecting that true form from the glass, which was only pictured in my
heart. Then would I sorrow to my self, and power forth such passions into the
air, as my heart, bring over loaded with the extremity they would force,
would constrain me to sit down, ending my speech with such sighs, as my
breathed sorrow would no less darken the air, then a mistie fogge does
obscure the sky. But at last, coming to my self, I would return home,
locking up my self within my lodging, a close prisoner by the commandment of
love; where to pass away the time, I would write passionate lines, amorous
ditties, pleasing fancies, pleasant rounddelaies, and doleful drerelayes. Now
would I think to win thee by letters, anon I thought it better to pen
speeches, but suddenly, both misliking me, I would throw my self upon the
bed, so long thinking which way to obtain thee, as in the end I should fall
into a slumber. Yet amidst my rest, my thoughts concerning thee were restles:
For then should I dream sometimes thou spakest me fair, repaying my kindenes
with sweet kisses, granting my requests and forward to do my will: but
awaking from forth that sovereign elusion, looking to find thee, I should
feel the bed-poastes, that hard hap, turning my glad heart to a new bread
sorrow, which was the more painful, by how much my dream was pleasing: at
another time, I should think, that suing to thee for savor, thou would
bestow frowns, and profering my service, thou would offer skornes. If I
sighed, thou would smile, laughing at my tears, and ioying at my grief,
requiting every kind demand with so cruel answers, as if thy bitter words
could not force me to leave my suite, thy skornefull farewels should frustrate
my will: offering to touch thine hand, me thought thou profereds thy foot, and
stouping to catch that, being glad of any thing, thou would in a rage fling
from me, and leave the door barred against me. There should I sit till my
teeth chattered in my head, and my heart aked in my belly: then should I shake
for cold, and sigh for sorrow, when thinking to knock my legs against the
ground to get heat, I should kick all the clothes off me, being in the end
constrained to awake through cold. At what time that cold fare would better
content me, then the former flattering cheer did please me, being as glad it
was false, as I would have been glad if the other had been true. Many like to
these did I endure before my acquaintance with thee, not knowing any means how
to obtain the same of thee, until happily finding thee in a summers evening
at the door, I presumed to enter parlie with thee, offering my self your
servant, which had been a tweluemoneth your sworn subject, doubting of your
patience, though you seem to be a pattern of pity. How and after what order
I have since that time besought your savor, your self shall be my judge, for
I list not to rehearse my daily shifts, to show my zeal, my manyfolde
conclusions to obtain your company, my gifts to woo the servants, and my
presents to gain your good will. But to be brief, thereby to come to that I
like best, one whole year I loved thee before thou knew me, and three more
are passed since first I spoke to thee: yet then was I as near as now I am,
and now as far off as I was then. Say therefore sweet, since to stay longer
yields but little comfort, shall my suite now end with the verdit, You love me?

To which long preamble, shut up with so whot a conclusion, she no less
prepared herself to answer him, then Friar Tuck used ceremonies before he
song mattens. She cast her eyes up to Heaven, as if she had been making her
prayers to love, sighing so bitterly, as I thought her placket lace would have
broken, then to the matter thus she answered. Alas gentle sir, I must confess
I have found you kind, and you have been at a great deal more cost then I
could wish you had, your suite has been long, and my kindenes not much, nor
do I hope you e^pect more at my hands then you have had, before my friends
have granted their good will. Maidens are modest, and must not be prodigal of
their courtesy: children are bound and cannot consent without their parents
counsel: pardon me therefore I pray you, if I say I love you not, since my
father knows you not, and think not much if I desire you to leave to love
me, until my mother give me leave to like of you. At which time assure your
self I will be as ready to perform your will, as they shall be forward to
wish me that good, and thus in the mean time, I hope you will rest satisfied.
This was a shroade bone for my passionate youth to gnawe on, that being so
stricken on the head as his heart aked therewith, thought to ease his sorrow
with this reply. Ah my sweetest sweet (quoth he) Think not on thy fathers
counsel, seeing a greater friend craves his deserte, nor let me rest their
leisure without pity, that has thus long remained constant unto thee. I love
thee nor for thy friends sake, though I love them for thy sake: nor do thou
loathe me for their pleasure that lives but at thy pleasure. But sweet and
sovereign of my heart, as thy thoughts be not tied to their wills, so let not
thy love be linked so fast to their liking, as their mislike should end my life
by removing thy love. Say my goddess, and therewithal as he was proceeding,
she cut off the rest with this short answer. I beseech you sir to leave off
your courting, unless you entend some other conclusion then as yet I can
gather: for of my faith love you I will not, nor consent I dare not without my
friends give their consents first, and thereupon she thrusted through the
throng and poasted out of doors, leaving my passionate lover to say his pater
noster alone, where we will leave them.

What I thought I will tell you, and I hope you will not doubt of the matter,
for that Honesty speaks it. One years love without acquaintance, and three
years suite to be never the nearer: either he was a bad lawyer, or she a
monstrous unjust judge: but be it, both a passionate Ass, and a peevish wench
were well met. But mark his folly and her cunning, he building Castles in the
air and setting trappes in the Sun to catch the shadow of a coye queen,
was pleased by her, with wagging his bawble, and ringing his bell, while she
picked his pocket and cut his pursse. A proper piece of service of a passionate
Soldier, and a pretty sleight of a flattering Slut: I would we had more of
them, nay why wish I that, since the world is too full of such already? Yet
of my honesty, she was as fit a match for such a fool, as might be found in
the world. A great deal of fond fancy repaied with a sharp short denial,
and three years affection rewarded with an ounce of flattery, mingled with a
pound of discurtesie? a good cordial to comfort so kind a heart. Oh the
subtilty of the devil, that under the shadow of obedience, couers y^ craft of
cosonage. It is hot love that buildes on friends liking, and pestilent
affection that relies rather on the mothers love, then on the Lovers loyalty.
Such as stands so curiously on their Parents good will, having dealt so
craftily without their consent, are worthy by Honesties doom to stand in a
Cage, until either their friends good will be got, or her sweet hearts license
obtained for her delivery. And this is too good, for that the kind Ass will
too too soon release her: I think this punishment would be worse welcome unto
her, namely, that she be bound from marriage, so long as she has kept him
without his answer, which will so pinche her prodigal desire, as either she
will forswear honesty, or never commit the like knauerie. Oh there is a
company of minions which delight to have many suitors, that they may brag
amongst their mates of their diversity of lovers: they think it commendable
to have store of customers. But knew they so much as I know, they were better
to go once in a fortnight to Greenes Cunnyberries, then to have such resort
to haunt their companies.

Honesty honors the consent of Parents, but abhorres such love as is built on
their liking, if there be no remedy but that either they shall like, or thou will not love, let him have thy Fathers good will before he obtaines thy
countenance: for doubtless she that will entertain lovers, and repay their
courting with kindenes, will care as little for her friends counsel, happening
on a mate she can fancy, as the horse will for hay, that has his manger full
of prouender. And what is the cause why so many stand so curiously on their
friends consent?